docs: goosing around blog on ollama (#1671)
block/goose: documentation/blog/2025-03-13-goose-ollama-local/index.md

---

> title: "Goose, But Make It Local With Ollama"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "AI, But Make It Local With Goose and Ollama"
```

Reviewer: goose is local on its own. the original title implies otherwise

Author: I had the same thought, glad you mentioned it!

> description: Integrate Goose with Ollama and learn how they work together under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Integrate Goose with Ollama for a fully local experience
```

authors: 
    - tania
---

![blog cover](gooselocalollama.png)

> On the [Goosing Around](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLyMFt_U2IX4uFFhd_2TD9-tlJkgHMMb6F&feature=shared) stream series, host [Rizel Scarlett](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rizel-bobb-semple/) [demonstrated how to use Goose locally with Ollama](https://youtube.com/watch?v=WG10r2N0IwM?feature=share) to interact with LLMs directly on your device. Her guest, [Parth Sareen](https://www.linkedin.com/in/parthsareen/), an experienced software engineer with a focus on building frameworks and systems for AI/ML, showed us the magic of structured outputs and how Goose and Ollama work together under the hood.

Reviewer: include Alice as a guest

Reviewer 2: wait alice wasnt in this one. she was in the stream after.

Reviewer: ohhh with langfuse! my bad

<!--truncate-->

> Goose serves as an on-machine AI agent that can interact with your applications and tools through extensions, providing the framework and interface for AI-powered workflows. Ollama enables running large language models locally with a simple API, handling the optimization of models to run efficiently on consumer hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Goose serves as an on-machine AI agent that can interact with your applications and tools through extensions, providing the framework and interface for AI-powered workflows. Ollama enables running large language models locally with a simple API, handling the optimization of models to run efficiently on consumer hardware.
```
```suggestion
Goose serves as an on-machine AI agent that can interact with your applications and tools through extensions, providing the framework and interface for AI-powered workflows. Ollama enables running large language models locally with a simple API, handling the optimization of models to run efficiently on consumer hardware.
```

Together, they create a self-contained AI agent workflow that puts advanced capabilities directly in the hands of developers.

# Getting Started Is Easier Than You Think
Before diving deep into the various capabilities of integrating Goose and Ollama, Parth walked us through how to set yourself up for success, and how straightforward it can be.

1. **Install and run Ollama** either through the command line or desktop application:
   ```bash
   ollama serve    # Or use the desktop app
   ```

2. **Pull your preferred model** (used Qwen 2.5 in this demonstration with 32B parameters):
   ```bash
   ollama pull qwen:2.5-32b
   ```

> 3. **Configure Goose to use Ollama**:

Reviewer: would link to the instructions in the Providers guide for this entire flow. Dont wanna update blog posts if the CLI changes

Author: Understood and agreed for sure! That would be annoying af, updated!

- **Direct control over model behavior** means you can fine-tune parameters without subscription fees or API limits. Open source models allow you to get a closer look at what's happening behind the scenes.

Personal use cases like development assistance, personal knowledge management, education, and content management are but some examples that can benefit from working locally and offline. You can keep research and sensitive data private, and utilize Goose when you have limited connectivity.

# Can My Machine Handle This?
This question came up repeatedly, and the answer is more encouraging than you think. As Parth pointed out, "You don't need to run the largest models to get excellent results." The requirements you'll want to look out for on your device boils down to this:

- **RAM is key**: 32GB is a solid baseline for larger models and outputs.
- **For MacBooks, RAM is your primary concern** given the unified memory architecture.
- **For Windows/Linux, GPU memory is more important** for acceleration

> Many use cases work perfectly fine with smaller, more efficient models that run on modest hardware. Models optimized for efficiency can deliver impressive performance even on standard laptops! Just start with a smaller model to test your workflow, then scale up as you need. This way you can figure out if you need the beefy hardware or not.

Reviewer: "perfectly fine" is a bit of a stretch

Author: Agreed, changed wording

3. **Be mindful of context windows**, local models have limits on how much information they can process at once.
4. **Experiment with different models**! Each has strengths and weaknesses you'll want to explore for your needs.
5. **For larger documents, chunk them** into manageable pieces, this helps a lot when you're working with larger files.

# It's About The Freedom To Choose
While there are trade-offs in terms of raw processing power when you go local vs cloud, you don't have to choose one over the other. As Parth summarized during the livestream: "Local AI isn't about replacing cloud options—it's about having the freedom to choose the right approach for your specific needs."

The benefits of owning your AI experience can be compelling for a variety of use cases. Whether you're a developer building tools, a writer working with confidential material, or simply someone who values privacy and control, I hope the Goose-Ollama integration offers a glimpse into how a local experience can benefit you, and explore a future where sophisticated AI is as personal and private as the data on your hard drive.

> To try out Goose, you can download Goose [here](https://block.github.io/goose/). You can also get a walkthrough on configuring Ollama with Goose in our [docs](https://block.github.io/goose/docs/getting-started/providers). If you have any questions or get stuck, feel free to chat with us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/block-opensource) or post an issue/discussion on [GitHub](https://github.com/block/goose/). Thanks for reading!

Reviewer: odd to have the download goose link at the bottom after all of the earlier steps on using goose

Author: Moved above into Getting Started
